>>> RIGHT NOW I WANT TO BRING IN
RETIRED AIR FORCE COLONEL CEDRIC
LEIGHTON.
COLONEL, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
WHAT DO YOU EXPECT HAMAS TO DO
DURING THIS BRIEF PAUSE IN
FIGHTING?
>> WOLF, I THINK WHAT THEY'RE
GOING TO DO IS THEY'RE GOING TO
MOVE THEIR FORCES AROUND.
THEY'RE GOING TO TRY TO AVOID
DETECTION BY THE ISRAELIS AND
THAT SPEAKS TO THE CESSATION OF
DRONE FLIGHTS.
HAMAS IS GOING TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THAT BECAUSE OF THE
SURVEILLANCE PICTURE -- THAT
PART OF THE SURVEILLANCE PICTURE
WILL BE LACKING FOR THE
ISRAELIS.
SO HAMAS IS GOING TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THAT.
THEY'RE ALSO GOING TO DEPLOY
THEIR FORCES IN A WAY THAT WILL
ALLOW THEM TO POTENTIALLY AMBUSH
ISRAELI FORCES.
NOW, THERE WERE SOME SERIOUS
CHALLENGES ON THE HAMAS SIDE.
BECAUSE ISRAEL IS SENDING A LOT
OF AIR STRIKES THEIR WAY AND A
LOT OF ARTILLERY STRIKES AS
WELL, AND WHAT THAT'S DOING IS
IT'S FORCING HAMAS BACK FROM THE
NORTHERN AREA OF GAZA.
WITH ALL OF THAT IN MIND, WHAT
YOU'RE SEEING IS A CONSOLIDATION
OF FORCES ON BOTH SIDES WITH THE
PREPONDERANCE OF ISRAELI FORCE
CONCENTRATED IN THE NORTH OF
GAZA AND THEN POTENTIALLY MOVING
INTO THE CENTRAL PART FOR A PUSH
ONCE MORE INTO GAZA CITY.
HAMAS IS GOING TO TRY TO KEEP AS
MUCH OF GAZA CITY AS THEY CAN
AND THEY'RE GOING TO TRY TO KEEP
THEIR TUNNELS ACTIVE AS WELL.
>> COLONEL, ISRAEL'S DEFENSE
MINISTER SAYS HE EXPECTS THE
FIGHTING AGAINST HAMAS TO
LAST -- IN HIS WORDS, AT LEAST
ANOTHER TWO MONTHS.
DO YOU SEE THAT AS BEING ENOUGH
TIME FOR ISRAEL TO ACCOMPLISH
ITS OBJECTIVE OF COMPLETELY
DESTROYING HAMAS?
>> NOT REALLY.
BECAUSE DESTROYING HAMAS WOULD
REQUIRE NOT ONLY A MILITARY
VICTORY, BUT ALSO A
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND POLITICAL
VICTORY.
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT I DON'T
SEE HAPPENING BECAUSE AT THIS .
POINT IN TIME, YOU HAVE TWO VERY
HOSTILE POPULATIONS PITTED
AGAINST EACH OTHER AND HAMAS IS
VERY DETERMINED TO KEEP ITS
POWER BASE IN GAZA AS LONG AS IT
CAN.
AND THE ISRAELIS, OF COURSE, ARE
DETERMINED TO UPROOT THEM.
BUT HAMAS HAS THE UPPER HAND
WHEN IT COMES TO THE HEARTS AND
MINDS OF THE GAZAEN PEOPLE.
ALTHOUGH THEY HAVE HAD BASICALLY
LESS THAN MAJORITY SUPPORT,
RIGHT NOW I THINK THEIR SUPPORT
HAS INCREASED AND THAT IS GOING
TO ALSO IMPACT THE WAY IN WHICH
ISRAEL HAS TO CONDUCT THIS WAR.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE MORE THAN TWO
MONTHS IF THEY WANT TO COMPLETE
THAT GOAL OF DESTROYING HAMAS.
>> RETIRED COLONEL CEDRIC
LAYTON, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>>> IN JUST A FEW HOURS FROM
NOW, THE FIRST HOSTAGES BEING
HELD BY HAMAS COULD BE ON THEIR
WAY HOME.
SO, WHAT WILL THAT TRANSFER
PROCESS ACTUALLY LOOK LIKE?
OBVIOUSLY IT'S GOING TO BE QUITE
COMPLICATED.
BUT WHERE DO THESE WOMEN AND
CHILDREN WHO ARE EXPECTED TO BE
THE FIRST ONES OUT OF GAZA, OUT
OF HAMAS' CAPTIVITY, WHERE DO
THEY GO?
JOINING ME NOW IS THE FORMER FBI
AGENT, ROBERT DeMECO, WHO HAS
WORKED ON HOSTAGE CASES OVERSEAS
IN HIS CAREER.
ROB, LET'S JUST START WITH HOW
MUCH OF A TEST DO YOU THINK THAT
THE FIRST DAY HERE IS GOING TO
BE FOR FUTURE SWAPS?
>> OH, IT'S HUGE.
AS THIS -- I CALL THIS A MOMENT
OF TRUST.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO HAVE TRUST ON
EITHER SIDE OF IT.
BUT DURING THE ACTUAL EXCHANGE,
YOU HAVE TO TRUST EACH OTHER
QUITE A BIT.
IT'S COMPLEX.
THERE'S SO MANY THINGS THAT
COULD GO WRONG.
EVEN WITHOUT ANY ILL EFFECT ON
EITHER SIDE, IF YOU HAVE A
FACTION NOT WANTING TO HAPPEN.
WE TRIED TO DO HOSTAGE EXCHANGES
AND EVEN COULDN'T FIND THEM WITH
THE HELICOPTER AND TRYING TO
NARROW IT DOWN BEFORE WEATHER
CAME IN.
BUT THIS ONE'S GOING TO TAKE A
LOT OF TRUST TO MOVE THAT MANY
PEOPLE THROUGH AN AREA THAT'S,
YOU KNOW, A PART OF WAR.
HAMAS ISN'T GOING TO WANT THEM
TO BE TRACKED WHERE THEY CAME
FROM.
I'M SURE THEY'LL COME TO A
CENTRAL POINT WHERE THEY'VE
GATHERED THEM AND MOVE THEM TO A
POINT AGREED ON.
SAME THING WITH THE ISRAELI
PRISONERS THAT ARE GOING TO BE
COMING OUT.
IT IS A TREMENDOUS TASK, AND THE
FIRST ONE IS GOING TO BE
EXTREMELY DIFFICULT.
A LOT OF HEIGHTENED TENSION ON
EITHER SIDE.
IT WILL GO DOWN A BIT WITH EACH
ONE.
BUT EVEN AS SMALL AS AIR BETWEEN
THEM CAN HAVE THAT SPIN OUT OF
CONTROL AS FAR AS LOSING TRUST.
>> HOW MUCH DOES IT HURT IT THAT
IT'S NOT A DIRECT LINE OF
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN ISRAEL AND
HAMAS?
I MEAN, THIS IS ALL BEING
MEDIATED THROUGH THE QATARIS.
>> SO, I'VE DONE A COUPLE OF
THESE.
ONE ACTUALLY, I ENDED UP
HAVING -- I WAS GOING THROUGH A
SENIOR QATARI THAT WE WERE
MOVING MILITARY FOLKS TO RECOVER
A PRISONER HELD BY THE TALIBAN.
AND IT GOT SO COMPLICATED THAT
THE QATARI HAD TO FLIP HIS CELL
PHONE SO I WAS TALKING STRAIGHT
TO THE COMMANDER BECAUSE WE
COULDN'T FIND HIM.
WE HAD TO LOWER THE PREDATOR TO
LOOK FOR THEM, AND THEY THOUGHT
WE WERE GOING TO SHOOT THEM.
THEY HAD MACHINE GUNS, SO THEY
GOODNESS WE HAD SOME
COMMUNICATION TO TALK EACH OTHER
DOWN.
THE SECOND ONE, ALMOST FOUR
YEARS AGO TODAY, NOVEMBER 2019,
WE EXCHANGED PROFESSOR KING AND
WEEKS, TWO PROFESSORS KIDNAPPED
IN KABUL FOR THE -- THREE.
THAT WAS A BIT DIFFERENT.
WE HAD TO GIVE OUR SIDE UP, T
THEIR THREE FIRST, BEFORE THEY
RELEASED THEIRS.
WE HAD TO PULL THEM BACK AT THE
LAST SECOND BECAUSE SOMETHING
FELL THROUGH.
IT DIDN'T HURT.
WE DID IT THE NEXT DAY, BUT IT
WAS STILL A COMPLEX SCENARIO.
THERE'S SO MANY PEOPLE INVOLVED
TO GET WORD BACK AND FORTH.
BUT THAT WAS THROUGH THE QATARIS
TOO.
SO, AGAIN, THE TRUST FACTOR,
QATARIS TALKING TO HAMAS, US
TALKING TO QATARIS, SINCE WE'VE
DONE IT WITH THEM BEFORE, I
THINK THAT HELPS A BIT.
>> SO, WHAT IS -- IF YOU'RE A
HOSTAGE AND YOU ARE ONE OF THE
FIRST ONES WHO'S BEING RELEASED,
WHAT DOES THAT REINTEGRATION
PERIOD LOOK LIKE?
OBVIOUSLY THEY'RE GOING TO NEED
MEDICAL EXAMS.
THEY WANT TO BE REUNITED WITH
THEIR FAMILIES.
THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
DEEPLY TRAUMATIZED FOR 47 DAYS
NOW.
WHAT DOES THAT LOOK LIKE?
>> SO, IT'S -- THE
REINTEGRATION, WE CALL IT
BRINGING THEM BACK IN.
THE FIRST THING IS MEDICAL.
I'M SURE WITH THIS MANY AT THIS
ONE TIME THAT THEY'RE GOING TO
HAVE SOMETHING SET UP WHERE THEY
COME IN AND THERE'S GOING TO BE
A MEDICAL TEAM FOR EACH PERSON.
I THINK THE FIRST ARE GOING TO
BE 13 PEOPLE.
DON'T KNOW WHO, DON'T KNOW AGES
AND STUFF.
BUT THERE'S GOING TO BE A
MEDICAL TEAM PROBABLY FOR EACH
PE
PERSON.
ALONG WITH THAT MEDICAL TEAM IS
GOING TO BE HOPEFULLY A
PSYCHOLOGIST.
THE FBI HAS A PSYCHOLOGIST UNDER
THE VICTIMS ASSISTANCE FOLKS
THAT USUALLY COMES FORWARD AT
LEAST TO A MIDDLE GROUND.
WELD USUALLY MOVE THEM TO
GERMANY, WHERE THERE'S A WHOLE
TEAM SET UP AT THE MILITARY BASE
THERE, IN ORDER TO REINTEGRATE
THEM.
AND THE PSYCHOLOGIST STARTS
ACTUALLY DICTATING WHAT'S
ALLOWED.
WE'D EVEN HAVE AGENTS WHO ARE
INTEL FOLKS TALKING TO THEM
WITHOUT THE PSYCHOLOGIST THERE
BECAUSE OF ALL THE STRESS THAT
THEY'RE GOING THROUGH.
WE WANT TO GET INFORMATION FROM
THEM TO HELP WITH OTHER HOSTAGES
AND OTHER THINGS, BUT THEIR
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH IS
MORE IMPORTANT.
AND THAT PSYCHOLOGIST THAT'S
ASSIGNED TO THEM IS THE ONE
REALLY DICTATING.
I'VE SEEN SOME PRISONERS -- I
DEBRIEFED -- HE WAS ACTUALLY
PAKISTANI.
AND HE HAD BEEN HELD FIVE YEARS
BY THE TALIBAN.
I DEBRIEFED HIM FOR ABOUT FIVE
HOURS BEFORE WE SENT HIM BACK,
AND HE HAD ME LAUGHING.
I COULDN'T BELIEVE HOW MUCH
SENSE OF HUMOR HE REMAINED AFTER
FIVE YEARS.
HE HAD A GREAT OUTLOOK.
>> WOW.
>> HE WAS MAKING JOKES AND
REALLY COMING AROUND.
THAT WAS INCREDIBLE.
>> THAT IS REMARKABLE.
I MEAN, YOUR INSIGHT ON THIS IS
SO FASCINATING.
AND OBVIOUSLY WE'RE THINKING OF
ALL OF THESE WHO ARE GOING TO BE
RELEASED.
ROBERT D'AMICO, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
HAPPY THANKSGIVING.